nocache - minimize filesystem caching effects
---------------------------------------------

The `nocache` tool tries to minimize the effect an application has on
the Linux file system cache. This is done by intercepting the `open`
and `close` system calls and calling `posix_fadvise` with the
`POSIX_FADV_DONTNEED` parameter. Because the library remembers which
pages (ie., 4K-blocks of the file) were already in file system cache
when the file was opened, these will not be marked as "don't need",
because other applications might need that, although they are not
actively used (think: hot standby).

Use case: backup processes that should not interfere with the present
state of the cache.


Install and Use
---------------

Just type `make`. Then, prepend `./nocache` to your command:

    ./nocache cp -a ~/ /mnt/backup/home-$(hostname)

You can also put the `nocache.so` file to a location like
`/usr/local/lib` and do `LD_PRELOAD=/usr/local/lib/nocache.so`.


Testing
-------

For testing purposes, I included two small tools:

* `cachedel` calls `posix_fadvise(fd, 0, 0, POSIX_FADV_DONTNEED)` on
  the file argument. Thus, if the file is not accessed by any other
  application, the pages will be eradicated from the fs cache.
* `cachestats` has three modes: In quiet mode (`-q`), the exit status
  is 0 (success) if the file is fully cached. In normal mode,
  the number of cached vs. not-cached pages is printed. In verbose
  mode (`-v`), an actual map is printed out, where each page that is
  present in the cache is marked with `x`:

Also, you can use `vmstat 1` to view cache statistics.


Example run
-----------

Without `nocache`, the file will be fully cached when you copy it
somewhere:

    $ ./cachestats ~/file.mp3
    pages in cache: 154/1945 (7.9%)  [filesize=7776.2K, pagesize=4K]
    $ cp ~/file.mp3 /tmp
    $ ./cachestats ~/file.mp3
    pages in cache: 1945/1945 (100.0%)  [filesize=7776.2K, pagesize=4K]

With `nocache`, the original caching state will be preserved.

    $ ./cachestats ~/file.mp3
    pages in cache: 154/1945 (7.9%)  [filesize=7776.2K, pagesize=4K]
    $ ./nocache cp ~/file.mp3 /tmp
    $ ./cachestats ~/file.mp3
    pages in cache: 154/1945 (7.9%)  [filesize=7776.2K, pagesize=4K]


Limitations
-----------

The pre-loaded library tries really hard to catch all system calls
that open or close a file. This happens by "hijacking" the libc
functions that wrap the actual system calls. In some cases, this may
fail, for example because the application does some clever wrapping.
(That is the reason why `__openat_2` is defined: GNU `tar` uses this
instead of a regular `openat`.)

However, since the actual `fadvise` calls are performed right before
the file descriptor is closed, this may not happen if they are left
open when the application exits, although the destructor tries to do
that.


Acknowledgements
----------------

Most of the application logic is from Tobias Oetiker's patch for
`rsync` <http://insights.oetiker.ch/linux/fadvise.html>. Note however,
that `rsync` uses sockets, so if you try a `nocache rsync`, only
the local process will be intercepted.
